The other tool we want to take a look at is VisualVM.
This is installed along with the JDK as part of the standard download.
You can launch it from a command line just by typing jvisualvm.
It's also available as a standalone tool.
If you go to a visualvm.java.net, you can download it and run it from here.
To run VisualVM, we can go to a command prompt, type jvisualvm, it'll run up.
The tool give us access to various monitoring tools for a Java application.
So, for example, if I go and click on the IntelliJ platform here,
so we're running IntelliJ IDEA at the moment.
From inside here, we get an overview of the application.
If we click on Monitor, we see some of the monitoring information.
If we click on Threads, and you can see threading information.
You can do profiling.
There's a sample there, and we can run the profiler.
Notice that from the monitor, we do have access to the GC.
So if I uncheck CPU and Classes and Threads,
then we do get some information about the garbage collection behavior,
but we don't get much information here.
To display more information, we need to install VisualGC.
So this comes as a plugin for VisualVM, and this,
we'll see in a moment, gives us much,
much more information about what's happening inside the virtual
machine with regards to garbage collection. So we've seen
running VisualVM. To install a plugin, we go to Tools, Plugins.
One of these is VisualGC.
If I select that and click on Install and go through the
wizard, and that plugin is now installed.
If I close down the app here,
the view of the app, and reopen it again, we now see VisualGC on
the tab, and we'll see we get lots more information about the
garbage collection that's happening.
So if we go back to the application we saw previously,
and then one slight change here.
I've just added a Thread.sleep call.
The reason I've done this is it will enable us to see more easily what's
happening inside VisualGC when we run the application.
So from the command prompt, if I run the application,
we notice this is going to run a lot more slowly now because of that
Thread.sleep call. If I go into VisualGC, there's the application. And
if I double‑click on this, we load up the details. Go to the VisualGC
tab, move this out of the way, and then what we can see here is
allocations as it's happening. So we can see that there's memory in the
S1 survivor space. We can see the Eden space filling up, the memory
being allocated.
Then, as the Eden space is full and the garbage collector runs,
we've seen the survivor spaces flip over so the memory is now
allocated inside the S0 survivor space.
And if we leave this to run a little longer, again,
we'll see the Eden space fill, a garbage collection
happen, and the S1 and S0 spaces flip again.
Notice that we are generating memory inside the old generation
here. So the old generation is accumulating memory, but at the
moment it's accumulating very,
very slowly. And at the moment, there have been no GCs inside the old
generation. Now we've just seen a single GC has now happened inside the
old generation. So again, with this application running relatively slowly
and allocating relatively infrequently, we see CGs happening less frequently.
The information at the bottom,
the histogram, is showing information about the objects that are in the
survivor spaces. So this is trying to show the what's called a tenuring
threshold, the number of objects that have survived garbage collects. So
the histogram shows the number of objects that have a garbage collection,
so I have a count of 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and then what happens to those objects
as more more garbage collections happen. A better example of that is with
IntelliJ IDEA.
So here, you get more information.
We can see we have objects that have survived a single garbage collect, two
garbage collects, three garbage collects, and so on and so forth. We find
that the Java virtual machine will modify its behavior depending on the
behavior of your application. It will try and predict as best it can your
application's behavior based on previous behavior and then, based on that,
try and organize the garbage collection audit as best it can, so how high
to set the tenuring threshold, how often to run garbage collections, how
much memory should be allocated to Eden space and the survivor spaces, how
much memory should be allocated to the old spaces.
So if I go back to our application and kill it and go back into
IDEA and take out the Thread.sleep call and build the application
again and then go back and run the application and go back into
jvisualvm, close the old window,
go to the applications, and reopen the window, we'll now see very different
behavior inside VisualGC. So we're now allocating memory very,
very quickly.
So we see the Eden space is filling much more quickly. There
are going to be more old generation garbage collections at the
moment. We're up to 57, 58, 59.
So that's counting very, very quickly.
Also the number of collections in Eden space is rising very,
very quickly as well.
If I kill the application again and run it with a G1 garbage collector,
go back into VisualGC, go to the Applications tab, look at the
application again, look at the VisualGC tab, again,
we're seeing different behavior.
So again, we're seeing the Eden space memory rise.
We're seeing old memory rise and fall.
We're seeing that the survivor space memory is being allocated.
We see the number of the objects in the tenuring threshold
of 1. And when they get moved around,
we're occasionally seeing objects with a tenuring count of
2 and those being allocated and freed.
Notice the behavior here is very,
very different to the behavior that we saw with the default and standard garbage collector, the serial garbage collector.